Trump subsequently deleted the tweet, but – here’s a shock – he seems to be loving the attention. At 6.09am EST he wrote “Who can figure out the true meaning of “covfefe” ??? Enjoy!”

Enjoy doesn’t seems quite right: it’s not exactly reassuring to know that the man with the nuclear codes can’t execute a tweet accurately. But we’re on this ride so we might as well get what entertainment we can from it.

In linguistic terms, covfefe-gate (I know) raises several interesting questions. It’s not yet clear what kind of life awaits the coinage in the wider language: perhaps it will remain tied to this moment, a famous one-off. It might, as McCulloch suggests, give rise to a productive suffix. Or it could become a meaningful word in its own right, with a sense akin to “snafu”. What is clear is that it’s not going to simply vanish. Trump is just too big(ly) for that.   

All of which gets me thinking about the influence of significant (let’s not say “great”) individuals on language. Iberian Spanish makes use of the sound “th” in many places where Latin American speakers just have “s” – for example, the middle consonant in the word gracias. There’s a story that this came about because the King of Spain had a lisp, which all his courtiers had to copy to avoid embarrassing him. Unfortunately, it’s a myth: “th” occurs only in specific positions, whereas in others “s” survives – not the situation you’d expect if imitation of a complete inability to pronounce “s” was the source.

There are, however, lots of real examples of invented words that survive and flourish – often to the point where it seems bizarre to think they were ever one person’s idea. Paul Dickson collected many in his book Authorisms: they include John Milton’s roughly 630 contributions to the English language, such as love-lorn, satanic, didactic, liturgical and pandemonium. Shakespeare’s plays apparently introduced the words bedazzle, fashionable, vulnerable and outbreak. There’s an obvious point to be made here, particularly with Shakespeare: plays have to be comprehensible to audiences, so it’s possible some of the words were current at the time they were performed, and The Bard merely gave us their first recorded uses. We’re on firmer ground with more recent examples: chortle was first used in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass. Cyberspace didn’t exist before William Gibson’s 1982 short story Burning Chrome.  

In a slightly different vein, mistakes made by so many people that they become the standard form are very numerous. One is “to curry favour” – of which the Oxford Dictionaries has a wonderful explanation involving petting a mythical horse. But I haven’t been able to unearth any common words which trace their origins to a mistake by a single person. If you know different, tell me in the thread below.

And what now for covfefe? Like it or not, Donald Trump has created a word. Whether it will spread its wings beyond self-reference is a different question. One way of looking at the development of language is by analogy with natural selection. If a word is “fit” enough it will multiply and colonise all sort of environments. I reckon covfefe, though the spawn of an alpha male, is somewhat hobbled by its narrowness of appeal, and won’t amount to much. Then again, a year ago, I would have said the same thing about Trump. 
